+++
title = "Introduction to Trees"
date = 2018-08-24T10:53:05-05:00
weight = 10
chapter = true
pre = "<b>6.1. </b>"
+++

## Introduction to Trees

A *tree* is a mathematical structure having a hierarchical nature. A
tree may be *empty*, or it may consist of:

  - a *root*, and
  - zero or more *children*, each of which is also a tree.

Consider, for example, a folder (or directory) in a Windows file system.
This folder and all its sub-folders form a tree - the root of the tree
is the folder itself, and its children are the folders directly
contained within it. (**Note:** We are only considering actual folders,
not shortcuts, symbolic links, etc.). Because a folder (with its
sub-folders) forms a tree, each of the sub-folders directly contained
within the folder are also trees. In this example, there are no empty
trees - an empty folder is a nonempty tree containing a root but no
children.

We have at least a couple of ways of presenting a tree graphically. One
way is as done within Windows Explorer:

![A Windows file system tree](windows-tree.jpg)

Here, children are shown in a vertically-aligned list, indented under
the root. An alternative depiction is as follows:

![A tree](tree-example.jpg)

Here, children are shown by drawing lines to them downward from the
root.

Other examples of trees include various kinds of search spaces. For
example, for a chess-playing program, the search for a move can be
performed on a game tree whose root is a board position and whose
children are the game trees formed from each board position reachable
from the root position by a single move. Also, in the sections that
follow, we will consider various data structures that form trees.

The .NET Framework provides access to the folders in a file system tree
via the
[**DirectoryInfo**](http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/system.io.directoryinfo.aspx)
class, found in the **System.IO** namespace. This class has a
[constructor](http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/system.io.directoryinfo.directoryinfo.aspx)
that takes as its only parameter a **string** giving the path to a
folder (i.e., a directory) and constructs a **DirectoryInfo** describing
that folder. We can obtain such a **string** from the user using a
[**FolderBrowserDialog**](http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/system.windows.forms.folderbrowserdialog\(v=vs.110\).aspx).
This class is similar to a [file
dialog](/~rhowell/DataStructures/redirect/file-dialogs) and can be added
to a form in the Design window in the same way. If `uxFolderBrowser` is
a **FolderBrowserDialog**, we can use it to obtain a **DirectoryInfo**
for a user-selected folder as follows:

    if (uxFolderBrowser.ShowDialog() == DialogResult.OK)
    {
        DirectoryInfo folder = new DirectoryInfo(uxFolderBrowser.SelectedPath);
        . . .
    }

Various properties of a **DirectoryInfo** give information about the
folder; for example:

  - [**Name**](http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/system.io.directoryinfo.name.aspx)
    gets the name of the folder as a **string**.
  - [**FullName**](http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/system.io.filesysteminfo.fullname.aspx)
    gets the full path of the folder as a **string**.
  - [**Parent**](http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/system.io.directoryinfo.parent.aspx)
    gets the parent folder as a **DirectoryInfo**.

In addition, its
[**GetDirectories**](http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/s7xk2b58.aspx)
method takes no parameters and returns a **DirectoryInfo\[Â \]** whose
elements describe the contained folders (i.e., the elements of the array
are the children of the folder). For example, if `d` refers to a
**DirectoryInfo** for the folder **Ksu.Cis300.HelloWorld** from the
figures above, then **d.GetDirectories()** would return a 3-element
array whose elements describe the folders **bin**, **obj**, and
**Properties**. The following method illustrates how we can write the
names of the folders contained within a given folder to a
[**StreamWriter**](http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/system.io.streamwriter\(v=vs.110\).aspx):

    /// <summary>
    /// Writes the names of the directories contained in the given directory (excluding their
    /// sub-directories) to the given StreamWriter.
    /// </summary>
    /// <param name="dir">The directory whose contained directories are to be written.</param>
    /// <param name="output">The output stream to write to.</param>
    private void WriteSubDirectories(DirectoryInfo dir, StreamWriter output)
    {
        foreach (DirectoryInfo d in dir.GetDirectories())
        {
            output.WriteLine(d.Name);
        }
    }

For a more interesting problem, suppose we want to write to a
**StreamWriter** the structure of an entire folder, as follows:

    Ksu.Cis300.HelloWorld
      bin
        Debug
        Release
      obj
        Debug
          TempPE
      Properties

We can break this task into the following steps:

1.  Write the name of the folder:
    
        Ksu.Cis300.HelloWorld

2.  Write the structure of each child folder, indented one level (i.e.,
    two spaces):
    
      - First child:
        
        ``` 
          bin
            Debug
            Release
        ```
    
      - Second child:
        
        ``` 
          obj
            Debug
              TempPE
        ```
    
      - Third child:
        
        ``` 
          Properties
        ```

<span id="recursion"></span> Note that writing the structure of a child
folder is an instance of the original problem that we want to solve -
i.e., writing the structure of a folder. The only difference is that the
folders are different and the amount of indentation is different. We can
solve such a problem using a technique called *recursion*. Recursion
involves a method calling itself. Because of the recursive nature of a
tree (i.e., each child of a tree is also a tree), recursion is commonly
used in processing trees.

In order to use recursion, we first must define precisely what we want
our method to accomplish, wherever it might be called. For this problem,
we want to write to a given **StreamWriter** a list of all the folders
contained within a given folder, including the given folder itself and
all sub-folders in the entire tree, where each folder is indented two
spaces beyond its parent's indentation. Furthermore, the entire tree
below a given folder (i.e., excluding the folder itself) should be
listed below that folder, but before any folders that are outside that
folder. In order to write such a method, we need three parameters:

  - a **DirectoryInfo** giving the root folder;
  - a **StreamWriter** where the output is to be written; and
  - an **int** giving the level of indentation for the root folder,
    where each level of indentation is two spaces.

Because the root folder must be written first, we begin there. We first
must write two blanks for every level of indentation, then write the
name of the root folder:

    /// <summary>
    /// Writes the directory structure for the given root directory to the given StreamWriter,
    /// indenting all entries to the given indentation level (incomplete).
    /// </summary>
    /// <param name="root">The root directory.</param>
    /// <param name="output">The output stream to which to write</param>
    /// <param name="level">The current indentation level.</param>
    private void WriteTree(DirectoryInfo root, StreamWriter output, int level)
    {
        for (int i = 0; i < level; i++)
        {
            output.Write("  ");
        }
        output.WriteLine(root.Name);
    
        // We now need to write the sub-directories . . .
    
    }

We can get the children using **root.GetDirectories()**. Each of the
elements of the array this method returns will be a **DirectoryInfo**
whose structure we want to write. Looking back at how we described what
we want the **WriteTree** method to accomplish, we see that it is
exactly what we want to do for each child. We can therefore make a
recursive call for each child, specifying that the indentation level
should be one deeper than the level for `root`:

    /// <summary>
    /// Writes the directory structure for the given root directory to the given StreamWriter,
    /// indenting all entries to the given indentation level (incomplete).
    /// </summary>
    /// <param name="root">The root directory.</param>
    /// <param name="output">The output stream to which to write</param>
    /// <param name="level">The current indentation level.</param>
    private void WriteTree(DirectoryInfo root, StreamWriter output, int level)
    {
        for (int i = 0; i < level; i++)
        {
            output.Write("  ");
        }
        output.WriteLine(root.Name);
        foreach (DirectoryInfo d in root.GetDirectories())
        {
            WriteTree(d, output, level + 1);
        }
    }

This method accomplishes the desired task, provided the directory tree
does not contain symbolic links or anything similar that might be
represented using a **DirectoryInfo**, but is not an actual folder.
While it is possible to detect these and avoid following them, we will
not consider that here.

There is something that may seem mysterious about what we have done. In
order to convince ourselves that this method is written correctly, we
need to know that the recursive calls work correctly; however, the
recursive calls are to the same method. Our reasoning therefore seems
circular. However, we are actually using a mathematical principle from
the discipline of formally proving software correctness: in order to
prove that a recursive method meets its specification we may assume that
any recursive calls meet that same specification, provided that these
recursive calls are all on smaller problem instances.

The restriction that recursive calls are on smaller problem instances is
what avoids circular reasoning regarding recursion. We associate with
each problem instance a nonnegative integer describing its size. For a
problem involving a tree, this size is typically the number of *nodes*
in the tree, where a node is a root of some subtree. Because every node
in a child is also in the tree containing the child, but the root of the
containing tree is not in the child, a child is always smaller, provided
the tree is finite. (For directory trees, if the underlying file system
is a Windows system, the tree will be finite; however if it is a
non-Windows system, the trees may appear to Windows as being infinite -
the above method actually will not work in such cases.)

The validity of this strategy is based on the fact that for any method,
the following three statements cannot be simultaneously true:

1.  All of the method's recursive calls (if there are any) are on inputs
    of smaller size, where the size is defined to be a nonnegative
    integer.
2.  When the method is given any input, if all of the method's recursive
    calls produce correct results, then the method itself produces a
    correct result.
3.  There is at least one input for which the method does not produce a
    correct result.

Thus, if we can ensure that Statements 1 and 2 are true, then Statement
3 must be false; i.e., the method will be correct. To ensure Statement
2, we only need to concern ourselves with cases in which all recursive
calls produce correct results; hence, we simply assume that each
recursive call produces correct results.

To see why the three statements above cannot be simultaneously true,
let's first suppose Statement 3 is true. Let *S* be the set of all
inputs for which the method does not produce a correct result. Then
because Statement 3 is true, this set is nonempty. Because each input in
*S* has a nonnegative integer size, there is an input *I* in *S* with
smallest size. Now suppose Statement 1 is true. Then when the method is
run on input *I*, each of the recursive calls is given an input smaller
than *I*; hence, because *I* is a smallest input in *S*, none of these
inputs is in *S*. Therefore, each of the recursive calls produces a
correct result. We therefore have an input, *I* on which all of the
method's recursive calls produce correct results, but the method itself
does not produce a correct result. Statement 2 is therefore false.

Once we understand this strategy, recursion is as easy to use as calling
a method written by someone else. In fact, we should treat recursive
calls in exactly the same way - we need to understand what the recursive
call is supposed to accomplish, but not necessarily how it accomplishes
it. Furthermore, because processing trees typically involves solving the
same problem for multiple nodes in the tree, recursion is the natural
technique to use.

A recursive method for processing a tree will break down into cases,
each fitting into one of the following categories:

  - A *base case* is a case that is simple enough that a recursive call
    is not needed. Empty trees are always base cases, and sometimes
    other trees are as well.
  - A *recursive case* is a case that requires one or more recursive
    calls to handle it.

A recursive method will always contain cases of *both* these types. If
there were no base cases, the recursion would never terminate. If there
were no recursive cases, the method wouldn't be recursive. Most
recursive methods are, in fact, structured as an **if**-statement, with
some cases being base cases and some cases being recursive cases.
However, for some recursive methods, such as **WriteTree** above, the
base cases aren't as obvious. Note that in that method, the recursive
call appears in a loop; hence, if the loop doesn't iterate (because the
array returned is empty), no recursive calls are made. Furthermore, if
the directory tree is finite, there must be some sub-directories that
have no children. When the **GetDirectories** method is called for such
a directory, it returns an empty array. These directories are therefore
the base cases.

The **WriteTree** method above is actually an example of processing an
entire tree using a *preorder traversal*. In a preorder traversal, the
root of the tree is processed first, then each of the children is
processed using a recursive call. This results in each node's being
processed prior to any node contained in any of its children. For the
**WriteTree** method, this means that the name of any folder is written
before any folders contained anywhere within it.

When debugging a recursive method, we should continue to think about it
in the same way - that is, assume that all recursive calls work
correctly. In order to isolate an error, we need to find an instance
that causes an error, but whose recursive calls all work correctly. It
will almost always be possible to find such a case that is small - in
fact, small cases tend to be the most likely ones to fit this
description. When debugging, it therefore makes sense to start with the
smallest cases, and slowly increase their size until one is found that
causes an error. When using the debugger to step through code, first
delete all breakpoints from this method, then use [Step
Over](/~rhowell/DataStructures/redirect/debugger-buttons) to step over
the recursive calls. If a recursive call doesn't work correctly, you
have found a smaller instance that causes an error - work on that
instance instead. Otherwise, you can focus on the top-level code for the
instance you are debugging. This is much easier to think about that
trying to work through different levels of recursion.

There are times when it is useful to know exactly what happens when a
recursive call (or any method call, for that matter) is made. Prior to
transferring control to the top of the method being called, all local
variables and the address of the current code location are pushed onto
the *call stack*. This call stack is just like any other stack, except
that it has a smaller amount of space available to it. You can, in fact,
examine the call stack when debugging - from the "Debug" menu, select
"WindowsÂ ÃÂ¢Ã¢âÂ¬Ã¢â¬Ë\>Â CallÂ Stack". This will open a window
showing the contents of the call stack. The line on top shows the line
of code currently ready for execution. Below it is the line that called
the current method, and below that line is the line that called that
method, etc. By double-clicking on an entry in the call stack, you can
use the other debugging tools to examine the values of the local
variables for the method containing that line of code. If this method is
recursive, the values displayed for the local variables are their values
at that level of recursion. Note that this only applies to the values
stored in local variables - in particular, if a local variable is a
[reference type](/~rhowell/DataStructures/redirect/reference-value), the
value of the object to which it refers will not revert to its earlier
state. For example, if a local variable is an array, the debugger will
show the value of this variable to refer to the array that it referred
to at that point, but the values shown in that array will be its current
values.

Once consequence of method calls using a call stack with limited space
available is that moderately deep recursion can fill up the call stack.
If this happens, a **StackOverflowException** will be thrown. Thus,
infinite recursion will always throw this exception, as will recursion
that is nested too deeply. For this reason, it is usually a bad idea to
use recursion on a [linked
list](/~rhowell/DataStructures/redirect/linked-lists) - if the list is
very long, the recursion will be nested too deeply. We must also take
care in using recursion with trees, as long paths in a tree can lead to
a **StackOverflowException**. Due to the branching nature of trees,
however, we can have very large trees with no long paths. In fact, there
are many cases in which we can be sure that a tree doesn't contain any
long paths. In such cases, recursion is often a useful technique.
