*Content in this syllabus is subject to change*

## *CIS 300 Fall 2022*
**Meets** *MWF 11:30am-1:20pm*

## Contact
{{% notice info %}}
**ALL** course help/assistance emails (especially for labs, homework, and quizzes) should be sent [**cis300help@KSUemailProd.onmicrosoft.com**](mailto:cis300help@KSUemailProd.onmicrosoft.com). This email will contact the instructor and all TA(s) for the course. Please allow one full business day for email responses. Questions regarding your grade on an assignment should be emailed directly to the person who assigned that grade.
{{% /notice %}}

### Professor: Josh Weese

- **Email:** [weeser@ksu.edu ](mailto:weeser@ksu.edu )
- **Want to meet with me?**
    - Check the syllabus calendar for class times and office hours.
    - Need to meet outside of class time? See **https://calendly.com/weeser**
- **Phone:** 785-532-7929
- **Calendar:** [weeser.net/calendar](https://weeser.net/calendar)

### Graduate Teaching Assistants

- Akhil Dudhipala (akhildudhipala at ksu.edu)
- Timothy Tucker (timoth54 at ksu.edu)

The GTAs will be responsible for grading homework assignments. **Please only email them directly if you have questions about how they graded a homework assignment.** They are also available for online help at the times shown on the calendar below. 

### Undergraduate Teaching Assistants

The following Undergraduate Teaching Assistants will be assisting this section:

- Lili Chen
- Jacob Legg (second half)
- Nathan Lee (second half)

The Undergraduate Teaching Assistants assigned to the other lab sections are:

- Luis Alcantara
- John Woods

## Office Hours Calendar

Below is a calendar showing the office hours for the semester. You can access it from any calendar application that supports the iCal format with the following link https://www.google.com/calendar/ical/gubep1p76upkafhip0skfj0n7s%40group.calendar.google.com/public/basic.ics.

<iframe style="border-width: 0;" src="https://calendar.google.com/calendar/embed?mode=WEEK&amp;height=600&amp;wkst=1&amp;bgcolor=%23FFFFFF&amp;src=gubep1p76upkafhip0skfj0n7s%40group.calendar.google.com&amp;color=%231B887A&amp;ctz=America%2FChicago" width="800" height="600" sandbox="allow-scripts allow-forms allow-same-origin"></iframe>

In order to manage TA office hours during busy times, we will use an online queueing system. If all available TAs are busy when you're needing their help, add yourself to the queue using the following link:

- [CIS 300 Help Queue](https://officehours.cs.ksu.edu/groupsession/2)

You will then be notified when a TA is ready to help you.

## Required Textbook

[*Data Structures in C#* ](https://cis300.cs.ksu.edu/), Rod Howell.

## Recommended Textbook

If you would like to refer to a textbook on programming in C#, I can recommend:

- *Programming in the Key of C#: A Primer for Aspiring Programmers*, Charles Petzold.

## Prerequisite

The prerequisites for this course are CIS 200 and either MATH 205 or  MATH 220. A grade of a C or better is required for each prerequisite. If you do not meet the prerequisite requirement for this course, you  should see me immediately, or you will be dropped from the course.

## Learning Outcomes

Students should attain competence in:

- Using interfaces to (partially) define a data structure
- Implementing and using standard versions of classic data structures: lists, stacks, queues, trees, and hash tables
- Implementing and using elementary algorithms for searching and manipulating a data structure
- Using recursion, including recursive definitions of data structures like lists and trees
- Using and implementing algorithms for sorting
- Understanding performance differences between various algorithms and data structures

## Programming Environment

The development environment to be used in this class is Microsoft  Visual Studio 2019. This software is available on the Windows machines  in the public labs in Engineering Hall 1114, 1116, and 1118, as well as  certain other public labs on campus. Please note that some of these labs are reserved for classroom use at certain times of the day - be sure to check the schedules posted by the doors.

If you wish to install the software on your own PC, you can download  it for free from the Microsoft Azure Portal. Please refer to "[Installing Visual Studio](https://cis300.cs.ksu.edu/appendix/vs/installing-vs/)" for more details.

## Topics

I plan to cover the following topics (not necessarily in this order):

|                                   |                                |
| --------------------------------- | ------------------------------ |
| Using Visual C# to construct GUIs | Strings and related structures |
| File I/O                          | Stacks                         |
| Queues                            | Lists                          |
| Trees                             | Binary search trees            |
| Priority queues                   | Tries                          |
| Hashing                           | Graphs                         |
| Sorting                           |                                |

## Grading

- Review Quizzes: 5%
- Lab assignments: 15%
- Homework assignments: 30%
- Weekly online quizzes: 50%

#### Review Quizzes

Prior to each lab (typically at 4:30 pm on the day of the previous lab), a video, readings, and a review quiz over these materials will be made available. This review quiz will be due at the beginning of the lab time. For example, the materials and review quiz for Lab 2 will be made available at 4:30 pm on Mon., Aug. 22, and the review quiz will be due at 8:30 am on Wed., Aug. 24. The main purpose of these quizzes is to help prepare you for the in-class discussion and the lab assignment for the day on which the quiz is due. You will be allowed to take each quiz up to twice, and the higher grade will be recorded.

#### Lab Assignments

One lab assignment will be assigned during each lab session. These  assignments will each be due at the end of the lab time. Each lab  assignment will be worth 2 points:

- 1 point for making a legitimate attempt at completing the assignment.
- 1 point for fully implementing correct functionality.

**You must do the lab assignment in the lab classroom during  the lab period in which it is published in order to receive credit for  it.** The lowest five lab scores will not be counted toward your final grade - no other lab absences will be excused.

#### Homework Assignments

Five programming assignments will be given as homework during the  course of the semester. All solutions must be submitted electronically  by the given due date. Late submissions will be accepted with a penalty  of 1% per hour, or any portion of an hour, late; thus, if a submission  is 1 minute late, the penalty is 1%. If multiple solutions are submitted for the same assignment, only the last one will be graded. No  submissions will be accepted after three days (i.e., 72 hours) past the  due date. The first four homework assignments will each be worth 5% of  the final grade. The fifth homework assignment will be a final project,  due during Finals Week; it will be worth 10% of the final grade.

#### Weekly Quizzes

An online quiz will be given at the end of most weeks. Each quiz will emphasize the material from that week, but may also include material  from previous weeks. Normally, a quiz will be made available on a  Saturday morning, and must be completed within 30 minutes of your  beginning the quiz. It will typically be due on Monday at 11:59 p.m. Any deviations from this schedule will be posted in announcements on  Canvas. **There will be no quiz the first week.**

Each quiz will involve solving a short programming problem. You will  be allowed to use course notes and Visual Studio to complete the quiz.  Your lowest quiz score will not be counted toward your final grade.

#### Grading Scale

Final grades will be assigned according to the following scale:

- 90%-100%: A
- 80%-89%: B
- 70%-79%: C
- 60%-69%: D
- Below 60%: F

## Course Delivery

Details regarding the delivery of this course are given in the [Course Introduction](https://k-state.instructure.com/courses/129535/modules#module_513192) module. In order to make sure you understand the delivery mechanisms,  you must obtain a perfect score on the quiz in that module before you  can begin the course material. You can take this quiz as many times as  you need to get a perfect score. The score will **not** count toward your final grade. 

## Canvas

All assignments and other course materials will be distributed via [Canvas ](http://canvas.ksu.edu). Grade information may be accessed there, and announcements will be  posted from time to time. Important class messages will be emailed to  your KSU email addresses and posted as announcements. **You must be enrolled in the course to access Canvas.**

## Microsoft Teams

All students in this class have been added to the team, "KSU CIS 300 Fall 2021". You can access Microsoft Teams at [teams.microsoft.com ](http://teams.microsoft.com), or you may [download the Microsoft Teams app ](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-teams/download-app). You will need to login using your KSU eID. One or more forums will be  available in Teams to facilitate public discussions with the CIS 300  instructional staff and your classmates. **Please don't post your code to these forums.**

## How to Succeed in This Course

- **Prepare for labs.** Preparatory videos, readings, and slides will be available for each lab assignment. Taking some time to familiarize yourself with the material will help you to do well on the lab assignments, as well as to learn more from the lab experience.

- **Complete the lab assignments.** Simply by attempting at least 35 of the 40 labs and following the programming style requirements will get you roughly 1/2 of the total points allotted to lab assignments. Furthermore, by trying, you will undoubtedly complete many of them, which will earn you even more points. Finally, what you learn from this experience will help you to do well on the homework and the quizzes.

- **Don't be afraid to ask for help.** While there is value in figuring things out on your own, sometimes a little help can go a long way. If you seem to be stuck on something, or if something in the instructions doesn't make sense to you, ask for help from me or one of the lab assistants - that's what we're there for.

- **Start assignments early.** Programming usually takes longer than you expect. A good plan for the lab assignments is to work on them during each scheduled lab time, utilizing the help available as needed. Homework assignments will require much more time than lab assignments. Starting early will help you to complete the assignments on time.

- **Review model solutions.** Even if you completed the assignment, seeing how I did it can help you to learn more.

- **Academic Honesty.** It is crucial that all work you do is your own. For this course, a violation of the Honor Pledge will result (at minimum) in an automatic 0 for the assignment or an XF for the course and the violation will be reported to the Honor System.  Posting (even if you don't get a response) course content on Stack Overflow, Chegg, or other similar websites is expressly forbidden.  This includes viewing posts as well.  It also includes viewing solutions to course content that has not been provided to you through canvas by your instructor or TA.  A violation of this policy will result in an immediate XF for the course.

    *If you are struggling in the course or you have doubts on something, please ask!  Your instructor and TA are here to help!*

## Safe Zone Statement

I am part of the SafeZone community network of trained K-State faculty/staff/students who are available to listen and support you. As a SafeZone Ally, I can help you connect with resources on campus to address problems you face that interfere with your academic success, particularly issues of sexual violence, hateful acts, or concerns faced by individuals due to sexual orientation/gender identity. My goal is to help you be successful and to maintain a safe and equitable campus.

{{% include "themes/ksucs-hugo-theme/static/files/syllabus-no-copyright.md" %}}

## Subject to Change

The details in this syllabus are not set in stone. Due to the flexible nature of this class, adjustments may need to be made as the semester progresses, though they will be kept to a minimum. If any changes occur, the changes will be posted on the K-State Canvas page for this course and emailed to all students.

##  Copyright Notification

Copyright © 2022 (Joshua L. Weese and Rodney Howell) as to this syllabus and all course content. During this course students are prohibited from selling notes to or being paid for taking notes by any person or commercial firm without the express written permission of the professor teaching this course. In addition, students in this class are not authorized to provide class notes or other class-related materials to any other person or entity, other than sharing them directly with another student taking the class for purposes of studying, without prior written permission from the professor teaching this course.