---
title: "CIS 300 Syllabus - Fall 2025"
weight: 2025
pre: ""
---

- [Previous Versions]({{% relref "./" %}})

## *CIS 300 Fall 2025*

### Section A 
- **Meets** *MWF 8:30am-10:20am*
- **Location** *DUE 1114*
### Section B
- **Meets** *MWF 11:30am-1:20pm*
- **Location** *DUE 1114*
  
## Contact

{{% notice info %}}

Our **preferred** method of contact will be through the Edstem Discussion board, linked in the course navigation menu. Any questions or feedback can be posted there. More detail on using this platform can be found below and in Canvas. 

If you do need to email us, please use [**cis300-help@KSUemailProd.onmicrosoft.com**](mailto:cis300-help@KSUemailProd.onmicrosoft.com). This email will contact the instructor and all TA(s) for the course. Please allow one full business day for email responses. Questions regarding your grade on an assignment should be emailed directly to the person who assigned that grade.

{{% /notice %}}

### Faculty: 
##### Dr. Josh Weese 

- **Email:** [weeser@ksu.edu ](mailto:weeser@ksu.edu )
- **Want to meet with me?**
    - Check the syllabus calendar for general office hours or look at my calendar directly (link below).
    - Need to meet outside of class time? See **https://calendly.com/weeser**
- **Phone:** 785-532-7929
- **Calendar:** [weeser.net/calendar](https://weeser.net/calendar)

### Graduate Teaching Assistants

- Robert Stewart

The GTA(s) will be responsible for grading homework assignments. **Please only email them directly if you have questions about how they graded a homework assignment.** They are also available for online help at the times shown on the calendar below. 

### Undergraduate Teaching Assistants

- Matthew Gwaltney
- Ali Jebril
- Daniel Chang
- Christian Bartel


## Office Hours Calendar

Below is a calendar showing the office hours for the semester. 

<iframe src="https://calendar.google.com/calendar/embed?height=600&wkst=1&ctz=America%2FChicago&showPrint=0&title=KSU%20CIS%20300%20Office%20Hours&mode=WEEK&src=azJ2azdlZGNmbWVhYmViZ3BwMWdiY2EzdDhAZ3JvdXAuY2FsZW5kYXIuZ29vZ2xlLmNvbQ&src=MWZmcTd1N2RkM2Z0dDFycms2N2YzcHY4cGdAZ3JvdXAuY2FsZW5kYXIuZ29vZ2xlLmNvbQ&src=ZW4udXNhI2hvbGlkYXlAZ3JvdXAudi5jYWxlbmRhci5nb29nbGUuY29t&color=%23AD1457&color=%23795548&color=%23009688" style="border:solid 1px #777" width="800" height="600" frameborder="0" scrolling="no"></iframe>

In order to manage office hours during busy times, we will use an online queueing system. If everyone holding office hours is busy when you're needing their help, add yourself to the queue using the following link:

[CIS 300 Help Queue](https://officehours.cs.ksu.edu/groupsession/2) 

You will then be notified via Microsoft Teams when someone is ready to help you. At that point, you may go to their posted office location. Important: When you enter the help queue, be sure to open Microsoft Teams, either the [web app](https://teams.microsoft.com/) or the [desktop/mobile app](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-teams/download-app).

## Required Textbook

[*Data Structures in C#* ](https://cis300.cs.ksu.edu/)

## Prerequisite

The prerequisites for this course are CIS 200 and either MATH 205 or  MATH 220. A grade of a C or better is required for each prerequisite. If you do not meet the prerequisite requirement for this course, you  should see me immediately, or you will be dropped from the course.

## Learning Outcomes

Students should attain competence in:

- Implementing and using abstract and reference-type data structures, including strings (and related structures like string builders), stacks, queues, priority queues, trees (including, but not limited to binary search trees, AVL trees, and tries), lists and arrays, linked lists, dictionaries, hash tables, heaps, priority queues, and graphs.
- Implementing and using algorithms for searching and manipulating a data structures
- Using recursion and iterative algorithms for data structures like lists and trees
- Using and implementing algorithms for sorting
- Understanding performance differences and complexity between various algorithms and data structures
- Using advanced object-oriented concepts, including interfaces, indexers, and eneumerators, to implement or partially implement data structures.
- Using appropriate data structures to solve real-world problems.

## Programming Environment

The development environment to be used in this class is Microsoft  Visual Studio 2022. This software is available on the Windows machines  in the public labs in Engineering Hall 1114, 1116, and 1118, as well as  certain other public labs on campus. Please note that some of these labs are reserved for classroom use at certain times of the day - be sure to check the schedules posted by the doors.

If you wish to install the software on your own PC, you can download  it for free from the Microsoft Azure Portal. Please refer to "[Installing Visual Studio](https://textbooks.cs.ksu.edu/cis300/appendix/vs/installing-vs/)" for more details.

## Topics

I plan to cover the following topics (not necessarily in this order):

|                                   |                                |
| --------------------------------- | ------------------------------ |
| Using Visual C# to construct GUIs | Strings and related structures |
| File I/O                          | Stacks                         |
| Queues                            | Lists                          |
| Trees                             | Binary search trees            |
| Priority queues                   | Tries                          |
| Hashing                           | Graphs                         |
| Sorting                           |                                |

## Grading

- Review Quizzes: 5%
- Lab assignments: 25%
- Homework assignments: 25%
- Exams: 45%

{{% notice  warning%}}

It is crucial that all work you submit for this course is your own. Posting (even if you don't get a response) course content on Stack Overflow, Chegg, or other similar websites is expressly forbidden and will result in an XF. This also includes viewing solutions to course content that has not been provided to you through canvas by your instructor or TA. The use of AI assisted tools to write your assignments is also explicitly forbidden (ChatGPT, GitHub Code Pilot, etc.). You may use these tools as help in the **learning** process, but work that you submit for a grade must be 100% done by you and only you. You are welcome to *discuss* assignments with your peers, but the work you submit must be your own. In no situation should you share your source code with another student.

{{% /notice %}}

### Review Quizzes

Prior to each lab (typically at 4:30 pm on the day of the previous lab), a video, readings, and a review quiz over these materials will be made available. This review quiz will be due at the beginning of the lab time. The main purpose of these quizzes is to help prepare you for the in-class discussion and the lab assignment for the day on which the quiz is due. You will be allowed to take each quiz twice, and the higher grade will be recorded.

### Lab Assignments

One lab assignment will be assigned during each lab session. These  assignments will each be due at the end of the lab time. Each lab  assignment will be worth 2 points:

- 1 point for making a legitimate attempt at completing the assignment.
- 1 point for fully implementing correct functionality.

**You must do the lab assignment in the lab classroom during  the lab period in which it is published in order to receive credit for  it.** The lowest five lab scores will not be counted toward your final grade - no other lab absences will be excused.

### Homework Assignments

Five programming assignments will be given as homework during the course of the semester. All solutions must be submitted electronically by the given due date. Late submissions will be accepted with a penalty of 1% per hour, or any portion of an hour, late; thus, if a submission is 1 minute late, the penalty is 1%. If multiple solutions are submitted for the same assignment, only the last one will be graded. No submissions will be accepted after three days (i.e., 72 hours) past the due date.

Each of the first four homework assignments will be worth 5% of the final grade. The fifth homework assignment will be a final project worth 10% of the final grade. The final project will take the place of a Final Exam.

### Exams

Exams dates can be found in Canvas. No final exam will be given. Each exam will be in place of a lab assignment for that day. They will each be worth one sixth (approx. 16.7%) of the final grade. Each exam will consist mostly of writing code. **Except under extreme circumstances (as judged by me), no make-up exams will be given.**

#### Grading Scale

Final grades will be assigned according to the following scale:

- 90%-100%: A
- 80%-89%: B
- 70%-79%: C
- 60%-69%: D
- Below 60%: F

## Course Delivery

Details regarding the delivery of this course are given in the pinned information module in canvas. In order to make sure you understand the delivery mechanisms, you must obtain a perfect score on the quiz in that module before you can begin the course material. You can take this quiz as many times as  you need to get a perfect score. The score will **not** count toward your final grade. 

## Canvas

All assignments and other course materials will be distributed via [Canvas ](http://canvas.ksu.edu). Grade information may be accessed there, and announcements will be  posted from time to time. Important class messages will be emailed to  your KSU email addresses and posted as announcements. **You must be enrolled in the course to access Canvas.**

## How to Succeed in This Course


- **Prepare for labs**. Preparatory videos, readings, slides, and a review quiz will be available for each lab assignment. Taking some time to familiarize yourself with the material prior to the lab time will help you to do well on the review quizzes and lab assignments, as well as to learn more from the lab experience.
- **Take the review quizzes**. These are due before the labs and will help to reinforce the preparatory materials. Taking the review quizzes will help you to learn the material and do well on the lab assignments and exams. Because you can take each quiz twice, if necessary, you should be able to earn all (or nearly all) of the points from these quizzes.
- **Complete the lab assignments**. We expect you to be able to complete these assignments correctly. Thus, you should be able to earn all (or nearly all) of the points from lab assignments for the semester. Furthermore, what you learn from this experience will help you to do well on the homework and the exams.
- **Don't be afraid to ask for help**. While there is value in figuring things out on your own, sometimes a little help can go a long way. If you seem to be stuck on something (particularly on a lab assignment), or if something in the instructions doesn't make sense to you, ask for help from me or one of the lab assistants - that's what we're there for. 
- **Prepare for the exams**. Following each lab, review the learning outcomes posted for that lab and make sure you understand what you should have learned. Also pay attention to the review quizzes. On the exams, you will be applying what you were expected to have learned in the labs.
- **Start homework assignments early**. Programming usually takes longer than you expect. Homework assignments will require much more time than lab assignments. Starting early will help you to complete the assignments on time.
- **Review model solutions**. Even if you completed the assignment, seeing how we did it can help you to learn more.

### More on the Edstem Discussion board

This semester, we will be using edstem.org, specifically, there Ed Discussion platform. Ed Discussion is a reddit/forum style web app that allows students to post and ask questions. This will be our preferred way of communication when it comes to questions/etc. in the course. Please adhere to the following guidelines:
- Before creating a new thread, please make sure there isn't a similar one already made.
- If you are asking a question in Ed Discussion, please correctly mark it as such along with the correct tags.
- Please make your thread public when possible in case others have the same questions.
  - Threads can be made *anonymous* when needed. Course staff may anonymize private threads and make them public if they find it to be beneficial for the class.
- When posting code, please do not post solutions or part of solutions to homework.
  - Other students will not have the ability to view your git repositories, so you can share code on a public thread as long as you link your git repository.
- If you would like a new category or tag made, please let us know!

If you need help getting started with the platform, please go through the following links:
- [Student guide to Ed Discussion](https://edstem.org/us/help/student-discussion)
- [Content Editor Guide](https://edstem.org/us/help/content-editor)
- [Push Notifications](https://edstem.org/us/help/push-notifications)

## Safe Zone Statement

I am part of the SafeZone community network of trained K-State faculty/staff/students who are available to listen and support you. As a SafeZone Ally, I can help you connect with resources on campus to address problems you face that interfere with your academic success, particularly issues of sexual violence, hateful acts, or concerns faced by individuals due to sexual orientation/gender identity. My goal is to help you be successful and to maintain a safe and equitable campus.

{{< syllabus exclude="copyright" >}}

## Subject to Change

The details in this syllabus are not set in stone. Due to the flexible nature of this class, adjustments may need to be made as the semester progresses, though they will be kept to a minimum. If any changes occur, the changes will be posted on the K-State Canvas page for this course and emailed to all students.

## Copyright Notification

Copyright 2025 (Joshua L. Weese) as to this syllabus, all lectures, and course content. During this course students are prohibited from selling notes to or being paid for taking notes by any person or commercial firm without the express written permission of the professor teaching this course. In addition, students in this class are not authorized to provide class notes or other class-related materials to any other person or entity, other than sharing them directly with another student taking the class for purposes of studying, without prior written permission from the professor teaching this course.
