# Comments

Within each source file that you edit, you will need to provide certain
comments as documentation. Visual Studio® automatically generates
source files that you will not need to modify - you don't need to add
comments to those files.

At the top of each file, add a comment of the following form:

    /* filename.cs
     * Author: Name 
     */

where `filename.cs` is the name of the file, and `Name` is the name of
the primary author. The primary author will either be you or, for files
provided for you, the name of the original author of that file. Whenever
you use someone else's code, it is important that you give them credit
for it. (To fail to do this is plagiarism.) Thus, if one of your source
files was originally written by Rod Howell, leave his name as the
author. If you have modified the original file, below the `Author` line,
insert a line of the following form:

``` 
 * Modified by: Your Name
```

Other comments documenting the use of provided code are described below.

When you complete a lab assignment, you will be given a code indicating
either that you have successfully completed the assignment or that you
have made a legitimate attempt at completing it. You will need to place
this code at the end of the comment at the top of one of source files
you edit, as follows:

``` 
 * Completion code: Code
```

Prior to each class,
[structure](/~rhowell/DataStructures/redirect/structs),
[enumeration](/~rhowell/DataStructures/redirect/enumerations), field,
[property](/~rhowell/DataStructures/redirect/properties), and method,
place a comment documenting its use. This comment should be delimited by
"///" on each line. When you type "///" immediately above a class,
structure, enumeration, field, property, or method, the IDE will
automatically insert additional text to form a comment stub such as:

    /// <summary>
    /// 
    /// </summary>

"`<summary>`" and "`</summary>`" are *XML tags*, which are understood by
the IDE. Between these tags, you should insert a summary of the program
component you are documenting. For example:

    /// <summary>
    /// Indicates whether this structure is empty.
    /// </summary>
    private bool _isEmpty;

If the program component being documented is a method with at least one
parameter and/or a non-**void** return type, additional XML tags will be
generated by the IDE. For each parameter, "param" and "/param" tags will
be generated. You should insert a description of the use of that
parameter between these tags. If the method has a non-**void** return
type, "return" and "/return" tags are generated. You should insert an
explanation of the value being returned between these tags. For example:

    /// <summary>
    /// Computes the number of times a given string x
    /// occurs within a given string y.
    /// </summary>
    /// <param name="x">The string being searched for.</param>
    /// <param name="y">The string being searched.</param>
    /// <returns>The number of occurrences of x in y.</returns>
    private int Occurrences(string x, string y)
    {
        . . .
    }

In your method summaries, include any requirements that must be
satisfied by the calling code in order for it to work properly. Comments
should also be used within methods to explain anything that is not
obvious from the code itself. For event handlers automatically inserted
by the IDE, a simple description of the purpose of the event handler is
sufficient for the summary - you don't need to describe the parameters.

If you are starting from a file provided for you, wherever you have
modified this code, add a comment indicating what you have modified. If
you are inserting provided code into a file that is predominantly your
own creation, include comments that make it clear what code was
provided, and who wrote it. If you modify it, include comments
indicating where you have modified it.
